Report preparation notes
========================

Working report thesis
---------------------

This should be written as a reproducibility investigation, not as a failed attempt
to exactly copy Anthropic's result.

The project implemented the requested pipeline: prompt sets, baseline evaluation,
activation capture, lightweight per-layer SAEs, contrast attribution graphs, and
inhibition/swap interventions. The results are mixed:

1. Physics units are the strongest positive reproduction.
2. Arithmetic carry is a partial reproduction.
3. Capitals/factual recall are weak or negative.

The defensible claim is that Anthropic-style attribution graphs and interventions
can produce useful causal diagnostics in this setup, but the lightweight SAE
features do not reliably recover clean sparse circuits across behaviours.


Why the final notebooks are structured this way
-----------------------------------------------

The final notebooks are behaviour-specific because mixed or older checkpoints
made interpretation harder. Behaviour-specific runs make the report cleaner:

- `run_gpu_units_hypertrain.ipynb`: final units evidence.
- `run_gpu_math_final.ipynb`: final arithmetic evidence.
- `run_gpu_capitals_final.ipynb`: final capitals evidence.

Colab was used because CSD3 was unavailable. This is an execution detail, not a
methodological dependency. All substantive steps are standalone scripts under
`src/`.

Old notebooks should remain as provenance unless there is a reason to remove
them. They show the path from exploratory attempts to the final protocol, but
the report should cite final notebooks and script outputs only.


Methodology decisions that matter
---------------------------------

Selected layers:

The project brief says "a few selected layers" and "lightweight SAEs per layer".
It does not require every transformer layer. The selected layers were
4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, and 28. Layer 32 was deprioritized because earlier results
were weak/noisy and the main final effects were already visible in earlier/mid
layers.

Per-digit arithmetic:

Qwen tokenizes many numbers digit-by-digit. Whole-answer attribution is therefore
misleading for multi-digit arithmetic because it often studies only the first
generated token. Arithmetic experiments use teacher forcing to study the relevant
digit position directly.

For `58 + 83 = 141`, the tens-position prompt is:

  Question: What is 58 + 83? Answer: 1

The correct next token is `4`. The dropped-carry alternative is `3`.

Contrast attribution:

For carry, the meaningful objective is not just "what raises 4?" but "what makes
the model prefer 4 over 3?" Therefore the math graph should use:

  --target "4" --contrast-target "3"

This attributes `logit(4) - logit(3)`.

All-position interventions:

Early final-token-only interventions were too narrow. The important positive math
diagnostic came from editing all prompt positions. This suggests carry-relevant
state is distributed across prompt positions and residual/MLP updates, not
localized only at the final token.

Feature sign filtering:

Attribution graphs include features with positive and negative effects on the
chosen objective. Sparse interventions should often use:

  --graph-feature-sign positive

This avoids mixing features that support the target with features that suppress
it.


Main results to write about
---------------------------

1. Physics units

This should be the headline positive result. The units experiments had the
cleanest intervention behaviour. The report should present this as the best
evidence that the independent pipeline can find behaviour-relevant features and
causal directions.

Key framing:

- The behaviour is narrower and less saturated than capitals.
- Source/target swaps are easier to interpret.
- Results are closer to the intended Anthropic-style validation pattern.

2. Arithmetic carry

Main prompt:

  Question: What is 58 + 83? Answer: 1

Clean baseline:

  logit("4") = 30.62
  prob("4") ~= 1.0000
  logit("3") = 23.50
  prob("3") = 0.0008
  gap 4 - 3 = 7.12

Important consequence:

The model is very confident. Small sparse-feature interventions are unlikely to
flip the answer, so logit movement is more informative than top-1 accuracy.

Final-token MLP knockout:

  logit("4") increased to 33.25
  logit("3") stayed at 23.50

Interpretation:

The carry digit is not localized in final-token MLP outputs of the selected
layers.

All-position MLP knockout:

  prob("4") fell to 0.6406
  logit("4") fell to 27.25
  prob("3") rose to 0.1836
  logit("3") rose to 26.00
  gap 4 - 3 collapsed from 7.12 to 1.25
  prob("2") also rose to 0.1426

Interpretation:

This is the main positive arithmetic result. Broad MLP/residual updates across
positions help stabilize the correct carry digit. However, because `2` also
rises, the intervention is not carry-specific; it broadly destabilizes digit
selection.

Sparse SAE-feature inhibition:

Graph-positive feature ablations produced small but directionally relevant
movements, including increases in the dropped-carry `3` logit. They did not flip
the output.

Interpretation:

The contrast graph contains some features related to the carry-vs-no-carry
distinction, but the current SAE basis does not isolate a compact causal carry
feature set.

Swaps:

Some math swaps moved probability in the desired direction. They are useful as
supporting evidence, but should not be oversold as a clean carry-feature transfer.
When the source prompt has a different answer token, swaps can leak source answer
identity rather than isolate carry.

3. Capitals

Dallas/Oakland capitals were weak because the model was not very confident:

  Dallas/Austin probability about 0.277
  Oakland/Sacramento probability about 0.222

Higher-confidence controls such as Zarqa/Amman and Basra/Baghdad were added, but
they still did not produce a clean swap story.

Interpretation:

Capitals should be reported as a negative or weak reproduction. This may reflect
that factual recall is distributed differently from units, that the selected SAE
layers do not capture the relevant factual representation, or that prompt/token
alignment makes all-position swaps hard to interpret.


Can we isolate a "carry 1" feature?
----------------------------------

Current answer: not cleanly with this setup.

The carry signal appears to exist in model activations because broad MLP/latent
interventions move the model toward dropped-carry alternatives. However, the
sparse graph-selected SAE features do not by themselves control the output.

This is not evidence that SAEs can never isolate carry. It is evidence that this
specific lightweight SAE setup did not recover a clean causal carry feature.

Likely reasons:

- carry information may be distributed across many latents
- the signal may depend on nonlinear feature interactions
- relevant information may sit in SAE reconstruction error
- the chosen layers may miss part of the computation
- final-token-only interventions were too narrow
- the model's confidence margin is very large
- attention/residual stream state may matter alongside MLP features

Optional future experiment:

Rank individual or grouped SAE features by marginal effect on
`logit(4) - logit(3)` using ablation or swap. This would not prove a clean carry
feature, but it could support the claim that effects are diffuse rather than
separable.


Suggested report structure
--------------------------

1. Introduction
   - Anthropic paper and motivation.
   - Reproducibility goal in an open model.
   - Why partial/negative reproduction is scientifically useful.

2. Methods
   - Qwen3-4B-Instruct.
   - Prompt sets for units, arithmetic, capitals.
   - Activation capture on selected layers.
   - Lightweight per-layer SAEs.
   - Attribution graph construction.
   - Contrast targets.
   - Inhibition and swap interventions.
   - Colab execution due to CSD3 unavailability; standalone scripts remain the
     real pipeline.

3. Physics units
   - Present strongest positive result.
   - Include graph and intervention table.

4. Arithmetic carry
   - Explain digit-tokenization and teacher forcing.
   - Present contrast objective.
   - Show baseline confidence.
   - Compare final-token MLP, all-position MLP, sparse SAE inhibition, and swaps.
   - State that broad causal signal exists but sparse SAE feature recovery is
     incomplete.

5. Capitals
   - Present as weak/negative reproduction.
   - Explain low-confidence prompt issue and high-confidence follow-up.
   - Avoid making capitals the headline.

6. Comparison to Anthropic
   - Similar pipeline components were implemented.
   - Clean sparse circuits were not consistently recovered.
   - Results appear sensitive to model, behaviour, prompt confidence, SAE quality,
     layer choice, and intervention locality.

7. Limitations and future work
   - Larger/stronger SAEs.
   - More prompts and less saturated arithmetic cases.
   - Systematic feature-impact ranking.
   - Attention/residual attribution.
   - Better source/target prompt matching.
   - More compute and repeated seeds.


Presentation framing
--------------------

Use a three-column story:

  Units: works best.
  Math: partially works, but sparse carry feature not isolated.
  Capitals: does not cleanly work.

The main conclusion should be:

  "The method transferred as a pipeline, but the clean sparse-circuit story did
  not transfer uniformly under this lightweight open-model setup."


Final diagnostic extension (July 2026)
--------------------------------------

One short final notebook was added: `run_gpu_final_validation.ipynb`. It does
not retrain the SAEs and does not construct a new attribution graph. It restores
the existing final checkpoints and graph JSONs, then performs two checks that
materially improve the evidential quality of the report.

1. SAE fidelity and achieved sparsity

`src/sae_diagnostics.py` evaluates every final behaviour-specific checkpoint on
the original deterministic train/validation activation split. It reports FVE,
normalised MSE, cosine similarity, relative L2 error, L0, active fraction,
dead-feature fraction and encoder/decoder norm distributions.

This analysis is a hypothesis test, not a post-hoc excuse:

- Poor validation FVE would support reconstruction insufficiency as one
  plausible contributor to weak sparse causal control.
- Good FVE with weak intervention effects would rule out that simple account and
  point instead toward achieved sparsity, unstable/non-unique features, graph
  selection, distribution mismatch or nonlinear interactions.
- Reconstruction statistics alone cannot establish which factor caused an
  intervention to fail.

The earlier "SAE reconstruction-only baseline" in `intervention.py` is not a
reconstruction-quality measurement. It uses an error-preserving splice and is a
forward-pass identity by construction. It should not be cited as evidence that
the SAE reconstructs well.

2. Graph-held-out prompt pairs

`src/heldout_validation.py` reuses the fixed final carry and force graphs on 12
new arithmetic pairs and 12 new unit pairs. It compares the clean condition with
sparse graph-feature edits, complete latent swaps and raw MLP patches. It reports
per-case effects, baseline-qualified aggregate means, deterministic bootstrap
intervals, directional success rates and top-token transfer rates.

Scope must be described exactly:

- The arithmetic pairs are absent from the complete addition SAE corpus and were
  not used to construct the graph.
- Unit source prompts are selected from the SAE validation split; their matched
  energy variants are absent from the corpus. Both are absent from graph
  construction, but the source is not SAE-held-out.
- Therefore "graph-held-out" is accurate for both domains. "Fully held-out" is
  not accurate for every unit source.

The benchmark uses edit strength 1 and all aligned token positions. It does not
tune feature sets, strengths or prompts after observing benchmark outcomes.


Final figure policy
-------------------

`report/FIGURE_PLAN.txt` is now the source of truth for all report figures.
Four vector figures are already generated and inserted in `report/report.tex`:

- pipeline schematic;
- SI-unit intervention comparison;
- arithmetic interventions and specificity controls;
- capital-city intervention comparison.

The final validation notebook will generate three additional figures from real
saved artifacts:

- `fig_sae_diagnostics.pdf`;
- `fig_heldout_generalisation.pdf`;
- `fig_math_attribution_graph.pdf`.

The carry graph figure is a backward-connected visual subset for readability.
The complete JSON and HTML remain the authoritative graph artifacts, and the
caption must state that nodes and edges were omitted from the printed view.


Optional TopK mathematics follow-up
-----------------------------------

`run_gpu_math_topk_retrain.ipynb` tests one specific, diagnosed weakness of the
final ReLU SAEs: thousands of active latents per example. It is deliberately
limited to mathematics and reuses the same deterministic final-position
activation support, layers, split, seed and latent width.

Candidates use TopK k=128, 256 and 512, unit-normalised decoder columns and no L1
penalty. TopK directly bounds L0, while decoder normalisation removes the simple
encoder/decoder rescaling degree of freedom. This does not address the separate
final-position-training versus all-position-intervention mismatch.

Selection occurs before intervention:

- mean validation FVE >= 0.90;
- minimum layer validation FVE >= 0.85;
- mean dead-feature fraction <= 0.80;
- choose the smallest mean L0 among eligible candidates.

If no candidate qualifies, the notebook saves diagnostics and stops before graph
construction. If one qualifies, only that candidate receives a new 58+83 graph
and the unchanged 12-pair held-out benchmark.

A matched no-carry specificity control inhibits the same positive carry-graph
features on each no-carry source. The paired quantity is target carry-gap delta
minus no-carry correct-gap delta. Negative values favour carry selectivity;
similar negative changes in both conditions indicate generic answer support.

All artifacts use `topk_math_retrain` paths. Existing final ReLU outputs are not
overwritten.

Completed TopK result
---------------------

TopK 256 was selected before intervention. Its mean validation FVE was 0.9410
(minimum layer FVE 0.9319), mean validation L0 was 171.6 and mean dead-feature
fraction was 0.716. The original mathematics ReLU SAEs had approximately two
thousand active latents per example, so the TopK model is a substantial and
measured sparsity improvement while preserving high reconstruction fidelity.

On the same 12 graph-held-out carry pairs, positive-feature inhibition changed
the correct-minus-dropped-carry gap by -0.875 on average (95% bootstrap CI
[-0.969, -0.771]), compared with -0.396 for the original ReLU graph. Full-latent
swap changed from -0.385 to -0.563. Neither sparse nor full-latent conditions
changed the top prediction; raw MLP transfer remained the upper-bound diagnostic
and transferred all top predictions.

The new matched control prevents overinterpretation. Inhibiting the same graph
features on the corresponding no-carry prompts changed their correct-minus-
carry-injected gap by -0.885. The paired carry-minus-control estimate was +0.010
with bootstrap 95% CI [-0.125, +0.167], and only 4/12 carry effects were more
negative than their matched controls. Thus TopK strengthened the graph-selected
intervention but did not establish a carry-selective feature set. The features
currently behave like generic arithmetic-answer support under this intervention.

This result must not be described as an inherent failure of SAEs. It is evidence
against a compact carry circuit recovered by this final-position, per-layer,
lightweight TopK/ReLU pipeline and its single-graph feature selection.


Final-position confirmatory follow-up
-------------------------------------

`run_gpu_math_carry_feature_followup.ipynb` is the final justified arithmetic
experiment before report writing. It addresses a specific mismatch: the SAE
training corpus and graph use final-token activations, whereas the completed
held-out benchmark inhibited those feature directions at all token positions.
All-position editing can perturb operand-token representations and is therefore
not a clean test of the final-token graph.

The notebook first repeats the unchanged 12-pair benchmark with `--positions
last`. It then excludes those 12 inspected cases, baseline-qualifies a fresh case
pool, assigns eight pairs to discovery and 24 separate pairs to confirmation,
and screens every positive graph feature individually at the final token. The
discovery score is:

  carry-target gap delta - matched no-carry control gap delta.

Negative values favour carry selectivity. Feature order is frozen before any
confirmation intervention. The predeclared primary panel is the first ten
features. Prefix panels of sizes 1, 3, 5, 10 and 20 are a secondary dose response;
the run also evaluates the full graph set, reverse-ranked features, each layer's
feature group and five random panels matched to the top-10 layer counts.

The primary panel is counted as confirmation only if its mean paired difference
is negative, the upper endpoint of its bootstrap 95% interval is below zero, and
its mean carry-target effect is negative. If this rule fails, do not choose a
better-looking secondary panel. The defensible conclusion is then that explicit
TopK sparsity improves compactness and intervention magnitude but still does not
recover cross-prompt carry-specific causality.


Guarded TopK units follow-up
----------------------------

The original final units ReLU SAEs reconstruct well (mean validation FVE 0.959)
but are extremely dense (mean validation L0 3544.6). Unlike arithmetic, units
already has a position-consistent sparse effect: on six baseline-qualified
graph-held-out pairs, final-token force-feature swaps increase the newtons-minus-
joules logit gap by +0.229 on average, with bootstrap 95% CI [+0.146, +0.333].
This combination motivates one final cross-domain TopK test.

`run_gpu_units_topk_retrain.ipynb` trains fixed TopK k=128, 256 and 512
candidates on the same deterministic final-token units activation corpus. It
uses the same latent width, seed, epochs, learning rate, decoder normalisation,
selection thresholds and metric-only selection rule as the mathematics sweep.
Only the selected candidate receives a force-versus-energy graph.

The selected model is first evaluated on sixteen of the seventeen available
validation-context pairs at the final token, leaving one reserve. A separate
feature screen then uses new force, mass and
energy prompts whose exact strings are absent from the SAE corpus. Physical
systems are assigned wholly to discovery or confirmation, preventing related
prompt variants from crossing the split.

The baseline gate requires the clean energy target to predict the joules prefix
and the clean force source to predict the newtons prefix. Whether the mass
control predicts a kilogram prefix is retained as a diagnostic and a
prompt-variant preference, but it does not determine eligibility. This is
deliberate: the mass prompt supplies a non-force activation control and is not
the causal target whose baseline competence is required for interpreting the
newtons-minus-joules effect.

The first baseline-only execution of this screen tested 32 systems under four
variants of an indirect prompt of the form "the force associated with [long
context]". It produced 85 expected energy predictions but only 29 expected
force predictions, leaving 27 eligible prompt variants across fourteen systems.
This was insufficient for the fixed 8-system discovery and 16-system
confirmation design. No feature intervention had been executed at this point.
The prompt pool was therefore repaired before causal results were observed: it
was expanded to 64 unseen systems and the matched prompt was rewritten to place
the measured quantity directly before the requested SI unit. This change
addresses clean-task competence while retaining exact-prompt absence, disjoint
system groups, and the original discovery/confirmation sample sizes. It must be
reported as a baseline-driven protocol amendment, not concealed as the original
predeclared wording.

For every feature panel, the same energy target receives either a force-source
swap or a matched mass-source swap. The primary specificity estimand is:

  force-source newtons-minus-joules gap delta
  minus mass-source newtons-minus-joules gap delta.

Eight discovery systems rank positive graph features. The ordering is frozen
before sixteen different confirmation systems are evaluated, with one prompt
per system. The Top-10 panel is the sole primary result; Top-1/3/5/20, complete
graph, reverse rank, layer groups, five
layer-count-matched random panels, full latent and raw MLP swaps are secondary
controls.

Primary success requires both the force-source mean and force-minus-mass mean to
be positive with bootstrap 95% intervals wholly above zero. If this rule fails,
do not choose another k, panel size or layer after viewing confirmation. Retain
the ReLU final-position result and report the compact TopK test as negative.
